a grant proposal of some sort and being funded so that I was able to buy some wave tanks so we could actually do some very simple, really, I would call high school senior level physics experiments.
But it was absolutely nothing.
What was your first impression of the capability of the students here?
Geology students don't think like physicists in general.
And I think part of the problem is that my background, of course, was in physics and math.
And many of these students were, including the graduate students, really were not able to handle simple calculus.
And that was bothersome.
I do recall one of my first classes when I had a class of eight or nine.
I had given one B and a bunch of Cs and maybe a D. I didn't give any As.
And I had this delegation from the Corps that appeared on my doorstep one day.
insisting that the student I'd given a B to deserved an A. It turned out it would disturb his straight A's or whatever.
Of course, I didn't change my grade.
But I was somewhat shocked that a group would.
I'd never heard of the environment I came from.
thought to try to persuade a professor to change a student's grade.
You might discuss with a professor an exam if you felt it was graded unfairly, but to demand of a professor that he change his grade because this student was an A student and he was the best student in this group.
Boggle my mind.
Trace now the growth and development of geophysics.
All right, I'll try.
In those mid-60s.
Well, I think the first major thing that happened, and perhaps John Calhoun would be able to tell you more about that, because I was never in the loop.
I was low man on the totem.
But they formed the College of Geosciences, I think, in 65.
And that college, in order to, I guess, give it some numbers, they made geophysics a separate department.
And then there was geology.
They made geography a separate department.
I guess Ed Duran was one of the professors in geography that I recall.
Oceanography and meteorology.
Now, I think oceanography and meteorology had been in the College of Science.
And so they were pulled out of there.
Geology, geophysics was pulled out of engineering.
And were made two separate departments.
Made into two separate departments.
And so for a year, that following year, I was alone as a department.
I was a department of one person.
You were geophysics.
I was geophysics formally.
Although Trav Parker approved whatever.
But I was geophysics.
Talk about crazy.
This didn't make sense.
Who was the first dean?
Horace Beyer.
Please.
And he was superb, really superb.
He is a fine scientist and a really fine administrator.
And at that time, what I do remember in the administration of the college is, well, because that goes back to another thing that I found when I got here.
in terms of any democratic operation, the university was not.
The faculty had very little to say about many things.
And, you know, as an administrator, you can argue those things back and forth.
But for somebody coming from New England, I thought it was,
And also, well, that was another problem.
But anyway, Byers, the first thing he, amongst the first things he did, he set up a College of Geoscience Faculty Advisory Council.
And I think we were probably the first college to have a faculty council.
And he was quite open about, he could give us assignments and he wanted us to
Oh, just a minute.
Take that off.
Okay.
Yeah, right.
He set up a council.
And in fact, I wrote the first draft of the bylaws for that council and served on it the first few years.
And I think Geosciences was probably the first
college on campus to have substantial faculty participation in faculty issues, as well as issues that affected the college.
The other thing that's very clear to me at the time, the College of Geosciences, particularly oceanography, somewhere along the line I also,
had a dual appointment in oceanography.
And for several years, research-wise, in the summertime, I spent on the ONR research contract that the department had.
And so I knew all the oceanographers very well.
and later participated in some major cruises.
And I'll tell you about one of them in a while.
Let's go back just a second on the dean.
Did you and other faculty members get the impression that Dean Byers had a goal or objectives for geosciences here?
What was he hoping it would become?
Well, all I can speak from is the fact, because he was a quality person,
a quality scientist that he hired quality people here, he would have liked to have seen us become a major player in the U.S., in the earth sciences.
And I have no reason to believe otherwise.
I don't know how the university was able to attract somebody of his quality here.
But he certainly was not going to sit around with a second-rate operation.
And in fact, as you know, he was almost immediately, shortly, moved up as vice president under Rudder before he retired.
Our college, I say our college because I also was a dean later, associate dean later on, was always heavily into research.
Other than those initial people that were here when we first arrived, but already oceanography had some degree of stature and meteorology, some degree of stature.
Who were the high profile?
Leaper in oceanography.
Dale Leaper.
Meteorology, I suppose Vance Moyer, but he was department head then.
Bob Reed?
Bob Reed was the most outstanding.
And in fact, I had some good vibes with Bob.
I originally, when I put together a theoretical course in seismology, much of the mathematics is similar to that that Reed's students.
So his students would come over and take my course.
And that went on for a couple of years.
And we desperately in geophysics needed students from outside because it was hard to find people to enroll in geophysics to start with.
And that went on for a couple of years until geophysics acquired a department head.
The first department head was Spencer.
He came from industry.
Is that Dale Spencer?
No.
Terry.
Terry Spencer.
Terry came from industry.
And...
He really was not, he's a good researcher, but he was not cut out to be a department head.
He sat behind closed doors and worked hard on his courses, took over the theoretical seismology, made it so difficult that oceanography students no longer took it.
That I found irritating.
Although, you know, I'm a friend of Terry's, but he should have come as a faculty member, but not been an administrator.
What were, let's see, what happened?
Let me tell you about the 64 crews.
Okay.
My research, I was able to get some stuff going with
my colleagues up at SCAS, Southwest Center for Advanced Studies.
I had the ship, or access to the ship, at least I thought so, and they had
facilities and equipment, field equipment, sauna buoys, types of things that I did not have access to.
And being a new young professor, my chances of being effective in that, trying to teach full-time and trying to develop a program, I needed help.
And so we did have a couple joint cruises, one in the Gulf of Mexico and one to the Caribbean, down the Cayman Trough area.
And on that cruise, it was designed to look at the crustal structure in the vicinity of the Cayman Trough, which is a fracture zone south of the Cayman.
It extends from
the Oriente Deep south of the eastern end of Cuba all the way to Guatemala, big deep trough, 7,000 meters south of the Cayman Islands.
Little was known about it.
And the crews, we had Southwest Center SCAS provided the sonoboys.
We were also able to borrow a sea gravimeter.
and a magnetometer.
It measured magnetic field variations and gravity variations due to the geologic structures.
And participating in that cruise was Ken Graham from South Africa, a bearded sole.
John Reitzel, one of my old friends from Woods Hole who did heat flow measurements, a bearded sole.
Another scientist from Rhodesia who had come to this country, the reason for these South Africans is Anton Hales,
was the director of the Earth Science Group at SCAS, and he had been director of the Bernard Price Institute of Geophysics in South Africa.
He was a world-renowned geophysicist.
He had done his dissertation under Sir Harold Jeffries in England, and I don't know if you would know of Sir Harold, but he was, okay.
So anyway, these
all these individuals, and we often do our work in the Caribbean, and we were able to get a full-page spread in the Sunday wrote a reviewer section of the Houston paper, the Post, I think.
And all of these individuals, there's a picture of me, and there's Ken Graham, and John Wright, so on and so forth, and they're all bearded, except me.
I came back to A&M,
I'd been gone for three weeks.
I had doubled up classes and so forth.
I walked into the department's head, and I said, did you see that spread?
Oh, yes.
I thought I'd get a pat on the back.
What did I get?
Good thing you didn't have a beard.
So that tells you a little bit about the culture.
It was a conservative place.
Oh, boy.
Right.
I think that also in the community.
Now, there was some salvation for me in the sense that there was already a liberal religious group here.
The Unitarian Fellowship existed.
It was made up, really started by oceanography people.
And I had been a founding member of a Unitarian Fellowship in Woods Hole.
So, in that sense, I had some people that I could talk to.
Describe that.
Did you become a part of the Unitarian group here?
Yeah, sure.
Describe that group at that time.
I can't remember whether Syed had already belonged to it.
It was a small group, probably about 15 people.
When I first started going to their meetings, they were meeting in the Hillel building.
And in terms of religious thinking,
The Unitarians are generally, you pretty much think whatever you want to think.
We don't have a creed.
We do, I think, have, we're not necessarily all agnostics, or what our interpretation is, but we certainly are far removed from the Baptist community.
And traditionally, Unitarians have been involved heavily in social service.
Other people, the Fricksells, you know, the Fricksells.
And I don't know when they first came here.
I don't know if they were already members or not.
Platt, Bill Platt.
You know Bill Platt?
Bill and Shirley were members.
So in that sense, I had a comfortable group that I could interact with.
You all met once a week?
Yeah.
When?
On Sunday mornings.
And eventually, of course, they now have a minister.
But we've gone through many years of lay leadership.
Who were the key lay leaders in those first years?
I don't even remember their name.
I don't remember the fellow that got me interested because he then had gone to, well, wait a minute.
an oceanography professor that's a chemist and then went to South Florida.
I've forgotten.
His wife's name's Ann.
I just don't remember.
Did you encounter some people either on campus or off who thought that you were highly liberal by participating in such a group?
I've never
I'm sure some people thought that, but nobody ever made it uncomfortable for me.
Now, in the local community, I came from a tradition, and my wife did, of small town meetings.
And, for example, in Woods Hole, Falmouth, we had
town meeting representative government, we had a representative for each 50 members of the community, and you knew who it was.
When we came here, one of the first things my wife did was go down to City Hall in Bryan and ask for a city report.
Now, in Falmouth, every year you get a report of all, in fact, you know what everybody's taxes are.
They never heard of such a thing here.
We soon found out that this community
is that a few of the older families really make all the decisions.
Now, it's not that they deliberately avoiding democratic... I mean, they think they're doing the best for the community, and they really do want to, but it's not democratic.
And so that was a time when...
They were also talking about revising the city charter, the Bryan City Charter.
And I can remember going to a meeting, a public meeting, and I'd forgotten what the issue was.
My wife, say, speaking up, and then we were both being denounced as communists publicly in the community, communists.
The other...
reaction I had in those early years is I had two children born here.
I mean, and so I had five children go to school here.
And I was considering running for school board.
I was considering.
And I discussed that with Jim Smith.
I don't know whether you know Jim and Edna, but I can remember Edna and Jim were involved in Democratic politics in the community.
Now, if you came from New England, you were a middle-of-the-road Republican.
When you got here, you were a liberal Democrat.
Right?
Okay?
And they laughed at me.
They said, first of all, you're a university professor.
Second of all, you're a Unitarian.
Third of all, you're a damn Yankee.
And 15 years later,
after arriving here, somebody told me, Dave, you're no longer a damn Yankee, you're just a Yankee.
So those years community-wise were bleak.
Now one thing I didn't, I said when I came here, I didn't ask the right questions.
One of the questions I should have asked, can you employ my wife on campus?
My wife had a degree in physics.
She worked for two electronic companies in Boston.
She was very good mathematics.
She was very good at taking a physicist's paper, converting it into language for an engineer.
And when she was at Woods Hole, she was able to work on a project.
When she came here, she couldn't work.
Now, for somebody that has an intellectual bent,
That was pretty devastating.
And it took her two or three years to get involved in the initial studies of the League of Women Voters here.
But just before she died, she had been thinking about going to law school in Austin.
We were going to try to work that out.
So that certainly was a negative here.
All right, back in the department, when did you and your colleagues begin to think that geophysics specifically and geosciences generally was making real progress?
What were some big steps?
Okay, the big steps, I would think that
The biggest step was when Earl Cook went out and brought the group from Shell here.
The research.
Now, was he the dean at that time?
He must have been.
I'm confused now, trying to remember the sequence because.
Well, he fought when Byers moved.
Let's put off the record here a minute.
All right.
Okay.
The Shell.
in Houston that had a major research lab.
I would have compared it with the Bell Labs, for example, in the area of earth sciences.
And the parent shell company decided that they didn't want any more of this
only directed research at their specific research problems, no more general rock mechanics and so forth.
And so the college put together with the blessing, I guess, of the university, Earl Cook put together a package that brought John Handen, let's see, John Logan, Mel Friedman,
George Sauer, Dave Stearns, all five people from the Shell Rock Mechanics Group moved en masse to A&M to form what became a research center for tectonophysics.
which in my view became an outstanding example of what a research center should do in terms of students coming up through the mill and so forth and so on.
The other interesting thing is that some years later, the one member of the group from Shell who did not come here was Neville Carter.
He went on to New York Sunnybrook
But he later became the person that I believe is the one that put geophysics on the national scene.
I mean, that really, he replaced Terry Spencer.
As the department head?
Well, there was an interim there, Tony Kanji for a year, I think.
And then Neville Carter came from Stony Brook to become department head.
And he's a good scientist and a hell of a good administrator.
Now, where did research funding come from during those developing years?
Let's talk about tectonophysics really
suddenly made us at least a semi-mecca for people to visit.
And their funding came primarily from the Department of Defense.
It came from NSF.
They were very successful in funding.
Now, geophysics, again, some of our funding came from ONR, from the
National Science Foundation primarily, and Department of Defense supported some activities.
And then there was a lot of, not big grants, but small grants from petroleum.
But very little from within the university or the state budget.
That's right.
We didn't have any built in.
And of course, I think that in some ways we were a little bit jealous of some people, for example, in agriculture who had built in resources.
Because I think we were the first college that really competed
for national funds from people like NSF.
Now I speak about the college because this was oceanography and geophysics and geology and meteorology.
And, you know, eventually they brought the ocean drilling project here.
Now the new
Oceanography Meteorology Tower Building.
Yes.
When does it come into play?
Boy.
It was under Earl Cook, wasn't it?
I'm not sure.
Let's see.
It used to be over in Bazell.
Oceanography Meteorology was in Bazell and in Goodwin.
And I guess Goodwin was held together by
steel straps here and there.
And I'm sure it must have been under Earl Cook.
Where was the dean's office located physically?
Boy.
Was it over in one of those?
No, wait a minute.
Wait a minute.
It was in Halbooty for a while.
It was in what is now Halbooty?
Yeah.
And what did you all call that building then?
Geology building?
Geology building, as far as I know.
Now, somewhere along the line there, I can remember they finally air conditioned the building.
And of course, in the process, they put in a drop ceiling that hid a lot of those marvelous moldings and so forth.
Because that building was designed the three major geologic
eras.
And somewhere along there, the facings on the tower, facing blocks were loose.
And there was a big debate about that tower had those beautiful tiles.
It was shaped like a topaz crystal.
And when the facing blocks started to loosen up,
The engineers decided, I guess, it was not cost effective.
They would have had to take the blocks off and re-cement them to the building.
And instead, they decided to take the tower down.
And that, we went through a whole spring with jackhammers going outside.
They would not find us classrooms elsewhere.
And it was like torment.
It was like torment.
Do you remember in those early years any missed opportunities?
Yes.
When I got to A&M, we had been given a set of instruments as part of the worldwide seismic net.
And these three low-frequency seismomas, three higher frequency.
And our responsibility was to set up a vault to put these instruments in.
This was supported
put together by DOA.
This is part of the worldwide net with one emphasis being nuclear detection.
And one of the things they asked me as I arrived essentially, where would I put it?
Well, I may have made the wrong decision in terms of student participation, but not in terms of a seismically viable site.
We put it out.
at the facility out in Junction.
And it's in the hillside.
We built a vault back into the hillside.
And it turned out it was one of probably the top one or two quietest stations in the U.S.
for earthquake detection.
And a guy named Mr. Parrott ran the A&M facilities out there.
And we had a person that changed the records each day and so forth.
And the records used to come to A&M, and I would do some annotation, and then we'd send them on, and then they'd send them back after the government had recorded them.
Terry Spencer was department head at the time.
Somewhere in there, the community in...